It's traditional to survey
the audience at the beginning
of one of these sessions,
as you saw at the last one.
So I want people to raise your hands.
How many people here are Canadians?
Yeah?
How do you pronounce J-A-V-A?
"Java!
Java!
Right?
Java!" James Gosling,
the inventor of Java,
who I tried to get him here today.
He's from Calgary,
so I think if I pronounce Java,
it's out of homage to the inventor
of this wonderful language.
By the way, it's also pronounced "Aqua."
I seem to be losing on that one.
And if I say process and project,
I hope you'll forgive me.
This is a, oh yes,
one other announcement.
I'd like to, because this is a standing
room only audience here,
it's not quite as standing
room as the last one.
Seriously,
I would like the Apple employees to
please vacate their seats so that the
paying developers can come and sit down.
So if any of you guys
are Apple developers,
you've heard me talk about
this a million times,
you Apple employees, get out of here.
I don't need you.
You're just going to ask me hard,
embarrassing questions at the end anyway.
I still see a few seats here.
Put your hand up if
there's a seat beside you.
There's some people standing out there.
Yeah, there's a few seats.
There's a bunch over here.
It's a good place to stand over there.
Seriously, Apple people, out.
Out and about, Apple people.
Pardon me.
Well, I want to give you a technical
overview of WebObjects,
and I want to position this product for
those of you who presumably don't know
too much about WebObjects development.
I have the great advantage in
this seminar of not having to give
an in-depth answer to virtually
any question you might ask,
because there's 16 more
seminars coming after this one,
and so the best answer I can give to
just about any question you might ask is,
"Go to session 417 on
Direct or whatever," and
they'll take care of it there.
But I would like you to understand
how a WebObjects application works,
what the different pieces are,
what the different objects are that you
write versus the ones that we write,
how you choose ours,
how you choose yours,
what's at the front end,
what's at the back end,
and what do the tools do.
If I can get most of that across,
I'll be pretty happy.
So...
That's our goal.
We're going to look at the frameworks.
If all goes well,
and I have had some trouble
with my database server here.
My database server, by the way,
is running Windows 2000,
so that if it crashes, it's not my fault.
But I do hope to build a little
application at the end if all goes well.
And I'd like you to understand at
least the titles of the other sessions.
What the heck is direct-to-Java client,
anyway?
Let's find out about that.
I'm going to have these little
logos in my presentation when it's
a good spot for you to go off and
think about a different session
that might answer more about this.
So what does WebObjects do?
It's an application server.
I hate that term, okay,
because it sounds like all it's
doing is coughing up applications.
But this is the slot the
industry has put us in,
and I think it's much more than that.
It's developer tools, it's frameworks,
and a runtime environment
and a monitoring environment,
but most importantly,
frameworks that do most of the
hard part of development for you.
For instance, the WebObjects application,
you might write some objects,
you might choose some of ours,
and deploy them on
this box in the middle,
this big square here,
and those objects might talk to a
variety of data services at the back end,
and might deliver either a Java client or
a web-based interface out the front end.
In fact, the same objects can do
both kinds of interface,
and there are other objects
that can even do WAP interfaces.
How many people here have
WAP on their telephone,
right here in the room?
Darn,
I was going to write a WAP application
and have you log in and send
me something during the demo.
I knew that probably wouldn't work out.
Now, who is this for?
This is a developer product.
Those of us who are Apple iServices
employees can make this thing look much
easier to use than it maybe actually is,
but that's all right.
This is a powerful product with
a huge amount of functionality
and a corresponding learning
curve associated with it.
But a steep learning curve is good
because it means you're going to
learn a lot in a short period of time,
right?
WebObjects works with a whole
variety of technologies.
I'm going to talk for the most
part about WebObjects 4.5,
but I'll touch a little bit on
what's coming in the future.
We work with a variety of programs.
Well, okay, today with 4.5,
you can use Objective-C and WebScript,
although I would encourage you,
if you're going to get started
and you want to move ahead
to the new all-Java version,
probably best to start
working in Java today.
We work with a variety of databases,
a variety of adapters
that you can see there,
and this is an open process.
There are more adapters
coming from third parties.
We have a variety of mainframe
connectivity solutions.
You can build different user interfaces.
You can work with a bunch of web servers.
The most important thing, open, open,
open, open, open, open, open.
This is a very open product
that people have made integrate
with a whole variety of oddball
things that we've never heard of.
We had a customer in
New York that apparently wanted
to use PIC as their database.
When I heard this, I thought, "PIC,
my God, didn't that database die in about
1975 or something like that?"
But we have an open enough product
where we can make it integrate with
anything that has a reasonable API.
You can develop on
those various platforms.
You can deploy on those others.
Note that Linux and Mac OS X are
sort of future release platforms
on this particular slide.
You can mix and match those as
needed and grow from a small
deployment to a vast one without,
hopefully, a huge amount of effort.
You might start with something like
this where your application is all
deployed on one little box there.
Don't be frightened by this next slide,
but you might grow from that to
something like this where you've got
multiple firewalls and multiple web
servers and multiple web object servers.
In fact, these purple things over here,
these are actual identical copies of
your web object's application running
on a bunch of different machines.
A little thing we call the adapter.
It runs on the web server
and sorts everything out,
keeps everybody straight.
You can move fairly seamlessly from that
to this with our runtime environment.
If you want to know more, go to the
Building Large Scale Applications
session.
A couple of key ideas.
There's objects at the front end,
objects at the back end.
The ones at the front end
we call Web Components,
and you use WebObjects
Builder to develop those.
The ones at the back end
are Enterprise Objects,
and you use Enterprise Objects
Modeler to do that.
I think they took me for this
talk because I talk faster
than anybody else at Apple,
but...
But these objects are
kept completely separate.
The objects that generate the HTML user
interface have no idea what the heck is
going on back at the database back end,
because they're all talking to a
common middle tier of business objects
that provide functionality on request
to the front end HTML components,
and these middle objects are created
on demand by the enterprise objects
framework objects at the back end.
And all the decisions about how
any of this works are actually
made pretty much at runtime.
So at the front end,
a web component consists of
some HTML that you might type up
yourself or get from somewhere,
along with this one special tag.
This is all we put in the HTML is
this tag that says WebObject.
It's a tag that says, "Here,
something cool is going to happen."
Really, that's all it is.
A WebObject name equals picture.
And then there's another file that says,
you know what?
When you see that WebObject tag,
name equals picture,
that means send this certain message
to this object at the middle tier
and take the result and put it
where that WebObject tag was.
And repeat this process over and over
again to build a dynamic page on the fly.
These components at the front end
that are producing these things
can produce all sorts of stuff.
They can produce plain text,
they can produce more HTML,
they can produce fancy,
clever JavaScript effects, images, WAP,
AppleScript, whatever you like.
It's an open framework
at the front end there.
And you can have a variety
of non-HTML components.
We have a partner, ReportMill,
that has a really interesting PDF-based
reporting kit that takes your middle-tier
objects and builds a dynamic PDF document
that you can vend to the end user.
We have a partner in
Europe called WAPObjects that's
building WAP-enabled things.
I just think that's so much fun to say,
"WAPObjects!" It's like
a cartoon sound effect.
We also have APIs in the product that can
generate XML in a fairly straightforward
way that hopefully I can... I don't
think I'm going to show you that one.
There's a session on XML coming later.
At the back end... Oh,
I can see this down here now.
This is great.
Thank you.
I would like to say "Konbanwa"
to the Japanese translators.
Konbanwa!
Oh, they're waving.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Also, whenever I do a presentation,
I like to try to fake out the camera man.
So I like to go this way...
For the backend,
we've got these enterprise objects.
We call them enterprise objects,
and they are objects like
anything else in the computer
science sense of the term.
They've got data.
They've got procedures
that operate on this data.
But what makes them special
is that there is something
gluing them to a data source.
There is this whole backend architecture
that says this kind of object,
customers, comes out of this, let's say,
Oracle table.
For every row in some Oracle table,
let's make a customer object.
For every row in some other table,
let's make another kind of object.
Excuse me.
on.
Oh, a whisper, a whisper.
Enterprise Objects manages this whole...
has a collection of middle-tier business
objects and takes care of issuing the
SQL necessary to fetch things out of
databases and constructing the objects.
It also notices when these
objects change and it pushes the
changes back into the database.
Nothing I like less than SQL programming,
and EOF is a great way to keep
me from having to actually
know anything about SQL,
so don't ask me any questions about SQL.
EOF also has a very sophisticated
architecture for managing
relationships of objects.
Customers purchased a bunch of products,
so a customer object has
a list of product objects.
In the database world,
it would be a one-to-many join.
Students take classes.
A student has a list of
classes that they're in.
A class has a list of
students that are taking it.
Many-to-many join with some sort of
ugly middle-intermediate table in SQL.
In the WebObjects environment
with Enterprise Objects,
this is very, very seamless.
You just think in terms of objects
and their properties and their
relationships to other objects.
EOF, the Enterprise Objects framework,
is the real gem of WebObjects.
I want to say I was not in the
meeting when they picked the name EOF.
I mean, that kind of meant something
in computing already,
but this really is a
dynamite product here.
How's that joke working in Japanese?
Probably not very well.
This really is the best
part of WebObjects,
is Enterprise Objects.
I would encourage you
to go to session 403,
please, this object modeling session.
I'm going to show you a rough
look at object modeling here,
but there really is a huge amount
of meat behind this that provides
you with all the rocket fuel
necessary to turbocharge WebObjects.
Coming soon, EJB.
Don't ask me, Rory, who was just here,
he's the guy to ask.
He loves talking about EJB.
And all of these different objects
are bound together at runtime
by a WebObjects application that
finds the front-end WO components,
finds these tags,
figures out what messages it has to send,
fetches objects, maybe from databases,
and mixes everything together and
sends a stream of plain ordinary HTML,
most of the time, to the end user.
along with some advanced
session management.
We have a very sophisticated
session object in WebObjects.
You might have only one copy
of your application running
and 100 users using it.
There are going to be 100 different
session objects created by the
application maintaining data for
each of those individual users.
And this is a full comp
sci kind of object.
You can subclass and
implement your own behavior.
You can use a variety of sophisticated
strategies for dealing with people
that seem to have connected to your
application and then disappeared.
You can arrange for objects,
session objects themselves
to be kept in the database.
You can add shopping carts
and security and so on.
We give you a framework that provides
this individualization as needed.
along with some runtime monitoring tools.
Remember that big scary slide?
You've got to get from the one copy of
the application to the 45 distributed
copies on seven different machines.
We have a tool called Monitor,
which itself is a WebObjects application.
It lets you go clickety-clickety-click.
I want four copies over there.
I want three over here.
I want two over here.
It starts them all.
It keeps them running.
It sends you mail if they crash.
It measures the load and
statistics and so on.
Pretty good runtime environment.
So here comes my big money slide.
We have this thing called
the request-response loop,
which is sort of the core of
everything that goes on in WebObjects.
A user makes a request.
They fill in a form.
They click on a hyperlink.
Data comes whipping in
through the web server.
Something happens on the web application,
and a response goes back.
Understanding that is sort of the
core of understanding the WebObjects
architecture because it shows you where
the various different components play.
I'm going to show you a
few pieces of this here.
Let's suppose on today's vast
internet there are three users and
You know that's the net
because it's a cloud,
some sort of ANSI standard.
And you've got a web server with
this WebObjects adapter on it.
You've got a variety,
I'm showing three here,
a variety of application
servers with Enterprise Objects
adapters to talk to databases.
The web server, as we've heard,
can be pretty much any operating system,
any web server.
The WebObjects adapter,
we have special adapters for
the more popular servers,
and we have a CGI adapter that really
you probably shouldn't use if you're
using one of these other servers,
but we have a variety of tuned
adapters for certain web servers.
The application server can
be a variety of platforms.
Again,
Mac OS X and Linux are sort of future
directions in the next product.
And we have a collection of
Enterprise Objects adapters that can
talk to a whole bunch of back-end
databases in a variety of ways.
So let's suppose we had a
really incredibly complex
WebObjects application here,
where a user's going to log in,
he's going to type "shayman",
it's going to do some processing,
it's going to look up
"shayman" in the database,
it's going to make a
user object or something,
and say "Welcome back, Steve."
I thought long and hard about
this particular example.
So there's two things
that have to happen.
We have to process that request.
We have to figure out what
to do with this string,
S.
Hayman,
that's coming in from the web browser.
And we have to generate a response.
We have to make up some HTML and
send it back to the web browser.
Well, it's actually three.
It's actually three customizable
phases of this loop.
There's a second action-invoking phase.
After WebObjects has
collected all this data,
then it thinks for a moment,
what action should I send?
What message should I send
to what other object?
And then that object is responsible
for generating the response.
So to see how all this works in action,
let's suppose a user has submitted
a request to a web server.
All the web--and the string S.
Hayman is coming along.
They filled in the form along
with some HTTP gunk about what
field that was and everything.
That request comes to the web server,
and the web server adapter hunts
around for a copy of the WebObjects
application just to hand this off to.
The very first time,
it's going to pick one at random.
There might be 30.
It picks one at random.
Subsequent times,
it's usually going to redirect
you to the same copy of the
application that you started with,
although that's optional.
So all that the server really
has to do is relay this string
to the WebObjects application.
So it finds one of those
throbbing instances there.
passes this string,
the user type is Hayman,
that kind of information is
coming along to this instance.
And that particular instance is
going to find the component that
created this particular page.
And a component is a combination,
as I said,
of some HTML and a second file that
defines the meaning of these tags.
And all you WebObjects wise guys
in the audience are already saying,
"He didn't close the WO tag, and besides,
the tag is not WO,
it's WebObjects." I don't care,
I didn't have room in that thing.
But previously,
this login component was used before
to generate that page that says,
"What's your name?" And now that
the response has come back in,
the WebObjects session is able to
automatically find the component that
caused that page to be generated,
and to study these bindings down there,
value equals username.
That means whatever they
typed in the box called input,
we want to assign to an
object called username.
So it takes a look at the various
foreign values that came in,
and it figures out what action to invoke.
Now there's probably some
Java code associated with
this particular component.
You can see in this little
example of a login.java,
this object has a string called username,
and it has a little
procedure called handleLogin.
And those bindings in that
other file in red there,
that's called the WAD file,
the WebObjects declaration,
that says where stuff goes.
The data that you got as the
username should be stuffed
into this username variable,
and then the method
handleLogin should be invoked.
And the handleLogin method here is just
messing around with a session saying,
"Here's the customer name.
You should go and fetch the
customer object." And then
it returns the welcome page.
So that's phase one and phase two
of this request-response loop.
We've extracted some values.
We've figured out what action to invoke.
The action is invoked, which,
as you saw in that bit of code,
says go find the
component called Welcome.
Another one of these things is loaded.
And in this case,
there's a tag in there that says
WebObject name equals username.
And there's a second file that says,
you know what,
username is a string and it gets
its value by sending the message
customer to the session object,
and it sends the message
first name to that one,
so we're going to need to fetch
some sort of customer object
so we can send this message,
and I'm getting to that.
Any needed objects might be
fetched from the database here,
and some SQL is going to
be generated automatically.
So one of these object model files,
which I'll show you in a moment,
is automatically loaded,
and that's just a textual
description that says,
you know what,
we're talking to Oracle in this case,
customer objects are coming
out of the cust table,
so you should probably find the row where
some property equals shayman and return
that and make it into a customer object.
So our backend automatically
figures out this SQL,
sends it to the database,
some text comes back from the database,
and is automatically stuffed
into a blank customer object
that EOF automatically fetched.
So the application is really
kind of disconnected from the
details of how these customer
objects are actually created.
All that SQL flow back and
forth happens automatically.
And this response component says, oh,
now that we've got that object,
I need to send the
message first name to it,
some string, Steve Hayman.
And then Steve comes back,
and we take that web objects
tag and we substitute it with
whatever the object responded with,
Steve,
and then some fascinating HTML goes
flowing back to the end user.
I assure you, you can write more
sophisticated applications
than this one with WebObjects,
but there's a basic loop like this at
the heart of every single one of them.
And every one of those arrows
that you saw is an opportunity
for you as a developer to
customize what's going on here.
You can leave the session
object alone if you want,
but if you want, you can also have it
intercept these things,
intercept the loading of
components and do clever things.
In fact, you can do quite a bit without
writing any code at all,
although I don't want to give the
impression that that's how this works,
because most of the objects as
they come out of the box are
prepared to wire themselves
into this request-response loop.
So the request response loop,
one of the reasons I came
up with this slide,
and one of the interesting
things about this job,
is that you never really
know what Steve Jobs is going
to announce in the keynote.
Is he here?
I used to go through a huge
song and dance about this
request-response loop because this
was how we licensed WebObjects,
and this is how we decided
what to charge you.
The more of these requests
and responses per second,
the more money you had to give us.
We had a whole tier of architecture,
right up to $50,000 where you could have
an unlimited quantity of these things.
Now it's $699,
but that doesn't excuse you from having
to understand how this actually works.
Please note that there was no
mixing of SQL and HTML in here.
In fact,
they're kept as far apart as possible.
I think the worst scenario
you could imagine is to have
SQL and HTML in the same file.
Something's wrong there.
You've got your user interface
and your persistence and your
business logic all mixed up.
In our case,
we keep them pretty separate.
We have one kind of object
that sends out HTML.
We have another kind of object
that connects to a database.
We have a middle object that
implements the business rules.
Is this student allowed to graduate?
That might be a business
rule on a student object.
What's his first name?
That might be a string.
But something like,
"Is he allowed to graduate?" might
be a complicated piece of Java that
determines whether he's paid his
parking fines and returned his library
books and sends a bunch of other
messages and then says yes or no.
You write logic at a
middle tier like that,
and you let our framework
map the data into and out of
Oracle or whatever you like.
You let our other frameworks and our
other components build the UI on the fly.
And you don't personally have
to write SQL or HTML at all,
unless you want to.
Some people want to.
So we have three tools here that
are used in WebObjects development.
Project Builder,
as I'm going to refer to it,
has sort of been retro-renamed
to now be Project Builder WO.
For those of you who are
experienced WebObjects developers,
this is the new name of the
project builder you're used to,
Project Builder WO,
just to keep it straight from the brand
new project builder that engineering
is working on for a future release.
But we have two other tools,
WebObjects Builder that builds
the front-end components,
and EO Modeler that sets up this
mapping to these middle-tier objects.
And I want to talk to you a
little bit about each of these.
The old version of Project Builder,
frankly, not that exciting anymore.
WebObjects developers in the
room would agree with me that
it's great that Project Builder
is undergoing a major overhaul,
and better debugging is coming.
I had to do the WebObjects
debugging seminar at WWDC last year,
and I'm glad now,
having done that seminar,
that our story is improving a little bit.
By the way,
do we have Mark Ritchie in here?
Mark won the World WebObjects
Debugging Championship last
year at WWDC in my session.
I'm sorry, Mark,
you have no opportunity to
defend your title today.
Anyway, let's talk about these tools.
Let's talk about these tools.
Oh, this way, okay.
No, come on, yeah, alright.
Thank you.
This, you know, this,
which is the top of this?
Can you tell by looking
at this which one is,
which way is the top?
No, me neither, alright.
Please go to James Dempsey's session on
designing reusable web components to hear
a lot more about how that is designed.
But the goal with building one
of these front-end components is
to come up with some HTML with
these special tags in it that say,
"Here's where something
interesting is going to happen."
And that might be a
directory called main,
main.wo, that's a WebObjects component,
and it's got an HTML file in it.
It's also got a WAD file,
a WebObjects declaration,
that defines the meanings
of each of these tags.
The tag called string1 is actually
a string object that gets its
value by sending the message
cost to the current product.
And then there's some
other properties on there,
what number format should we use.
The object called link1 is a hyperlink,
and it's going to cause the message place
order to be sent back to this object.
And the third part of one of
these components is typically
some executable Java code here.
you need to create some of these things
to build a WebObjects application.
In fact,
you'll probably create lots of them.
You usually have one for
each page and it's a whole
fractal kind of relationship.
You can have components that
contain other components,
you could have a header bar component
and the menu thing down the side
and you could have a footer and
you could have components that
cause a loop to happen inside of
which other components are firing.
You build a lot of these things to
come up with a complex application.
And how do you make these?
Well, you could use stickies if you want,
you know.
You can use Emacs, VI,
whatever your favorite.
How many people think VI is a
much better editor than Emacs?
Any other VI people?
Good, good.
Emacs?
Stickies?
But the point is that all these
things are just text files.
We have some nice tools,
but you don't have to use
them if you don't like them.
You can use whatever tool you want.
Or you could use some kind
of a WYSIWYG HTML editor,
and there happen to be a couple
out there that are smart about
this extra WebObjects tag.
Or you could use our
own WebObjects Builder.
And WebObjects Builder presents
you with something like this.
I should,
I've been waving at that screen too long.
Come over here.
In this bottom window,
you're looking at some component, okay?
And in the middle,
that section that says HTML,
that's a rough view of what
your HTML is going to look like.
There's an image object,
that's the square.
There's a string, that's the thing in
between the curly things.
There's a hyperlink down here,
and you can dress this up with
whatever HTML formatting you want.
WebObjects Builder is
a not-bad HTML editor.
It does bold, it'll make the text bigger,
it can drag in colors and
pictures and make your thing
look really ugly really rapidly.
So that represents main.wo/main.html,
let's say.
In the bottom half is kind of a visual
representation of this WAD file.
My current main object
apparently has an object called
"product" associated with it.
There's a line,
and below that are methods.
It has a message called "place
order" that you could send to it.
And I might conceivably want to
arrange that when you click here,
where it says "click
here" and by the way,
that's the terrible UI to have it
actually say "click here" in a hyperlink.
That is so 20th century.
You need to make a
relationship between that,
you need to indicate that you want that
message called when this link is clicked.
How far can you go with this?
So you draw, you draw a little line like
that in WebObjects Builder.
You draw a line from one to
the other that says I want that
place order message to be sent
when this hyperlink is clicked.
And new in WebObjects Builder 4.5,
it pops up a little list of all
the possible properties of a
hyperlink object right there.
You pick the one you want
called Action in this case.
This is the action I want
the hyperlink to trigger.
and then you're done.
In the top window that's an inspector.
That shows you all the properties
of the currently selected thing.
And I'm going to hopefully run WebObjects
Builder live in a moment here to
show you how this all actually works.
But this is the sort
of methodology you use.
You can work with a WYSIWYG view
like that or if you like you
can also work in a raw mode.
You can type the HTML up yourself.
You can type the WOD yourself.
You'll probably forget
to put in semi-colons.
You'll probably forget to
close some of the tags.
It's probably not such a hot
idea to work in the raw mode.
But you could also, if you want,
farm out the HTML to a graphic
artist in your department.
They wouldn't need to know
anything about WebObjects Builder.
So long as you begged
and pleaded with them,
I'm begging you,
don't touch those WebObjects tags.
Please leave them alone.
That's kind of important.
But
At least you are not exposing
all of your business logic.
There's no SQL in there.
There's no custom code that says how we
compute whether a student can graduate.
It's just interface.
Just interface definitions.
Also, once you've written a
bunch of these objects,
WebObjects Builder has palettes where
you can put common things you might want
to use in several different scenarios.
You can drag them off of here
and drop them off of there.
Four or five of these
come with WebObjects.
We would love it if you would all
put this one on your application.
A little image there, ready to go,
powered by WebObjects.
Drag that, drop it on your application.
I think that's actually a
hyperlink that takes you to
apple.com/webobjects or something.
There's a bunch of other useful
pre-written objects in here
that are ready and raring to go.
And then this last one is a palette
that I personally have been working on.
I keep re-implementing the same darn
things on a lot of different projects,
but I can now put them on a palette
like this and drag them off of
there and drop them into different
components as I create them.
Or I could even mail that palette to
you if you wanted to have a localizer
bar or a cheesy bar graphing thing
or a thing of a guy running like
this with a PDF document in his hand.
Those are just graphic representations
of some interesting bit of
functionality that I can drag and drop.
I want to show you that
a little bit later.
We've got a good session coming on
designing reusable components that will
talk more about how all this actually
works and how to architect a component
so that it really can be used effectively
by people other than yourself.
Personally, I write a lot of
non-reusable components too.
I'm not that proud of that,
but I put my good ones on these palettes
so I can use them in different scenarios.
So that's the front end,
WebObjects Builder.
The back end, we have another tool,
EOModeler, Enterprise Objects Modeler,
that lets you indicate
what database you want.
I want Oracle, I want Sybase, I want DB2.
It lets you indicate what
tables you want out of there,
and what you want to
do with those tables.
I would like my Cust table in Oracle to
correspond to customer objects.
So with this EOModeler tool,
you design relationships between
some kind of database schema and
Some collection of objects
that are going to form the
middle tier of your application.
And what did I do with my water?
Here it is.
I'm looking for the picture on here
of the kids and the Toy Story logo,
but I guess it didn't
make it to this one.
That was a camera pointing at a bottle,
wasn't it?
Anyway.
So EO Modeler is one of the
prime tools that you really,
somebody in your organization
needs to understand this
enterprise objects modeling stuff.
Doesn't need to be
every single programmer.
Some people might be better at the
UI parts with WebObjects Builder.
But this is pretty important because this
establishes the connections between the
kind of objects you want to make and how
they're going to be stored in a database.
So for instance,
I've got an Oracle database running
on my trusty old laptop here,
if it hasn't crashed,
which it did several times today.
Windows 2000, not ready for . And in that
Oracle database is some car information.
I've got a manufacturer table,
I've got a model of car table,
I've got packages and features and so on.
But it has kind of a crummy schema.
The table names aren't very good.
They're very compact and cryptic.
There's more data in there
that I actually need.
There's tables I don't even care about.
There's tables with spelling mistakes.
But that doesn't matter
because with the EOModeler,
I can say I would like nice,
beautiful customer objects with
easy to use APIs to come out of
that particular Oracle database.
So you do that with EOModeler
in a very graphical way.
You can indicate, for instance, in this
I'm sorry for this,
this little oval should
be down a little bit.
This is indicating vehicle objects are
going to come out of the MDL table.
and the PRMin column of that table,
the minimum price of the car,
is going to be available to these vehicle
objects as a property called BasePrice.
So once I've fetched a vehicle object,
I can send a message like BasePrice,
and the appropriate thing will
come out of the database for me.
I can send a message like LoadedPrice,
or VehicleName.
And I can also use this
to define relationships.
I've got vehicle objects
and I've got maker objects.
So there's a Mustang object and
a Ford object that are going
to come out of the database.
And down at the bottom
half of the window there,
you have relationships
between these objects.
Vehicles need to know who their maker is,
and in SQL that's a join.
Similarly, makers need to know what their
list of corresponding vehicles is.
It's a one-to-many join.
And all that stuff is defined
graphically in one of these files,
and this is nothing
more than a text file,
a big fancy text file,
that your application loads later.
And at runtime, by loading this file,
it learns how to do all this stuff,
how to fetch cars,
how to fetch manufacturers.
If the Sybase guy comes along
and gives me a terrific deal,
throw out Oracle, bring in Sybase,
I could just tweak a couple of
things in this model that say,
"You know what,
now we're talking to Sybase,
making the same kind of object as before.
My other applications
wouldn't need to care.
They're not concerned with SQL,
they're just concerned with the kind of
objects that this model defines." So this
gives you a level of database and schema
independence that's very valuable here.
It also lets you define complex
relationships between different objects.
I've got a vehicle object in
the upper left-hand corner,
I've got a maker object
kind of in the top middle,
and there's an arrow going between them.
And we have this scheme
called key-value coding,
which is another wonderful
thing you ought to learn about,
where you can just send a sequence of
messages as strings with dots in them.
So if I've got a vehicle,
I can send vehicle.maker.makername
that will automatically
traverse this relationship,
find the maker name,
the string "Ford", and
bring it back to me.
And you hook up paths like
that in WebObjects Builder,
because WebObjects Builder is aware
of all the definitions found in
one of these object model files.
Pretty interesting stuff.
Project Builder,
the old Project Builder Woe
is probably not worth spending
any time talking about here,
although if you install WebObjects 4.5,
you will get this tool.
I think you'll be very interested
in the new Project Builder,
which is coming.
I personally cannot wait for that.
But Project Builder, as it stands now,
they both have the same role,
the new one and the old one.
Let's organize all of your .wo components
and your EO Model D files and your
.java class code and anything else,
images and sounds that you
want in the application.
Let's organize all that stuff and run
the compiler and let you decide what
things should be localized and so on.
So you do spend quite a bit of
time in this tool typing in,
hopefully not too much time,
debugging code.
Something that's definitely worth
learning a little bit about,
although I'm not going to dwell on that.
So I really got my fingers
crossed here that this
development demo is going to work.
Could I have five on that
one and four on this one,
please?
[Transcript missing]
This machine is that screen.
This machine is this screen over here.
Actually, you know what?
Can I change my mind?
Can I have four on both screens?
How good are you guys?
Hey, that's better.
Okay,
here's some stuff that I started before
that I'm going to come back to later.
I want to show you.
The basics of building first
an EO model and then an
application with Project Builder.
Then when I'm ready, not now,
but I'm going to want
five on that screen later.
I'm calling an audible here.
This is not what we discussed earlier.
I'm changing my mind.
Very dynamic, dynamic, late binding.
That's what WebObjects is all about.
So we've got a bunch of tools here.
I've got EOModeler going here,
and I want to build a new object
model of a database running on my
big honkin' Oracle server over here.
So let's start EOModeler and
arrange to build a new model.
Can everyone see this all right?
On Mac OS X's server,
we have a vast collection of adapters.
is the founder of WebObjects,
a new web application that
will be available for your use.
It's a great third-party opportunity.
This is a browser.
This could scroll to
indicate more adapters.
And frankly, on some of the other
platforms like Windows NT,
you do have a little
wider choice of adapters,
just because Mac OS X Server is
a little bit newer.
But here I'm going to indicate which of
these many adapters do I want to use.
Do I want to use the LDAP adapter?
Well, it will ask me for some
LDAP connection information.
Do I want to use OpenBase Lite,
which is a pretty good free
database that comes with WebObjects?
Well, no.
I actually want to use Oracle.
And I want to connect
to my Oracle database,
run on this laptop over here,
and learn what its schema is,
and define a way that I can make
manufacturer objects and vehicle objects.
So the first part is to remember
the Oracle connection information.
Anyone care to guess
what my password is here?
Tiger, that's right.
That's how you break
into an Oracle database.
You try Scott and Tiger,
because nobody ever changes that.
And EOModeler is going to learn a bunch
of things about that Oracle database.
It's going to, for instance,
show me all the tables
that are available.
It's reached over and contacted
that database and learned about all
these tables that are available.
I got a few with spelling
mistakes like Invitory,
and I got Bonnet, Dept,
and Amp for the standard Oracle demo of
the world of departments and employees.
But the particular tables I'm
interested in are Manu and MDL.
I got manufacturers and models of cars.
And I like category as well,
but I wouldn't like these ones.
I want those three tables
to participate in my model.
EO Modeler will now go out and
contact that database and ask you a
few referential integrity questions
that I always just hit next here.
I suppose I really ought to
think about that sometime,
get open the documentation,
find out what that was about.
It's probably important.
I might go to a couple
more sessions this week.
It would be good for me.
And you guys know, you guys know,
you hit next when you see that panel too,
and then you come back later, oh yeah,
referential integrity,
because I really should nullify
when this thing is deleted.
But it will also ask me if
I want any stored procedures,
and the correct answer
is almost always no,
none.
And here we'll build a
simple object model for me.
And this model says that, all right,
you seem to have these
tables in the database,
cat, gree, manu, and middle.
Therefore, I'm prepared to make cat,
gree, manu, and middle objects for you,
assuming that's what you want.
Well, it's close to what I want.
I would like them to have better names,
though.
Category.
What's a category of car,
like a pickup truck or a minivan?
Maker of car.
Instead of MDL,
why don't we call it vehicle?
And let's fix these over here.
These are the actual classes
that are going to be used.
A technical overview of
WebObjects for new developers,
this session highlights the key
aspects of its architecture,
its numerous technological advantages,
and its relevance for web
application development.
Topics include what's new in version 4.5,
a roadmap of features,
building a high-level application,
and an introduction to EOF.
Ha!
These columns in the database,
there's a column called
Add Tag in the database,
it's a Varchar2.
There's a column called
PRMax in the database,
it's a number.
Therefore, this model says,
I will make your vehicle objects have
a decimal number property called PRMax,
corresponding to the number
property called PRMax.
They'll have a string
property called MDLName.
Let's call that something better,
let's call that vehicle name.
Let's call this loaded price.
This is the base price.
You might want to fix up some
properties of these other objects.
Take my maker object,
let's call that a maker name.
Maybe I don't even care about
some of these other properties.
I could delete them,
I could pick some subset
of the database schema,
but I'm designing objects here.
I'm designing a recipe for creating
objects out of a particular data source.
In addition, there are,
down at the bottom, relationships that,
in the case of Oracle,
the modeler is able to
automatically discover.
It can ask the database for some
information about primary and
foreign key constraints or something.
And then it decides that, "Oh,
I guess makers have a one-to-many
relationship to vehicles." So,
I'm going to arrange... Oh,
you know what?
We've got a diagram view here.
Ooh.
I was very excited to see this diagram
view in the Project Builder demo today,
so I don't have to come
over here to see it.
I've got vehicle objects,
I've got maker objects,
and I've got a one-to-many
relationship between them.
Every maker has a list
of vehicle objects,
and if I send the message
"mdl array," I can get a list
of all the matching vehicles.
And if necessary, SQL will be created,
things will be lazily
fetched only on demand,
which is another great feature.
But that's kind of an ugly name.
Let's call that "vehicles."
Now I can send the message
"vehicles" to my forward object and
get a list of all the forward cars.
We'll fix up these relationships
that go the other way,
too.
Maker, category, and so... Oops.
Category, and so on.
And you're just defining a resource here,
a file that's going to be used
later by perhaps many different
applications in your organization,
so that not all your developers
need to know these icky details
of how this actually works.
And believe me,
there are a number of icky details.
Maybe that wasn't the
best choice of words.
There are inspectors on all these things,
so you can look at something
like this and determine exactly
what SQL is going to be used,
whether it's read-only,
what to do if it's null,
what do you want to do
with these relationships.
There's a lot of power in here.
And there's even... There's also
the ability... This will tell me
whether my database is actually
still running... To go and fetch all
of them and show you the contents,
just so you can verify that what you
think is happening really is happening.
So there's all the vehicle
names in my database.
I asked it to fetch all those properties.
I could ask it to fetch
all of the vehicles for me,
just to confirm that the data
I think is in this database
actually is in this database.
Okay?
That is a complete and working EO model.
I'm tempted to use the
one that I already wrote.
Because I know it works.
Rather than this one.
Well, we'll save this one.
We'll live dangerously.
This will be the big
"Auto-by-Steve" EO model here.
I want to use this in
a future application.
I want to be able to
load this model and then,
bam, create maker objects and
manufacturer objects and so on.
So we may come back to EO Modeler later.
We may spend a lot of time in EO Modeler
if some of these other things don't work.
But let me make a new... I want to
make a new WebObjects application here.
There's different kinds of
WebObjects applications you can
make in Project Builder Woe here.
I want to make a new one.
And I was thinking about
this earlier today.
I wanted my application,
my car browsing application,
to be one that everybody
will want to use.
So I'm going to call this
application "I Love You."
I was originally going to
call it something about cars,
and then I had this great idea.
So we're building an
application called I Love You.
And there are a variety of,
it says wizards here, but that's wrong,
these are assistants.
They're not wizards, they're assistants.
We had a meeting last week,
they're not wizards anymore,
they're assistants.
There are a variety of different
assistants that you could use here.
I've got 18 minutes,
do I need an assistant?
No, I think I'll be fine.
My favorite assistant
is the none assistant.
I think that's the assistant that
most developers actually use.
Thank you.
Yeah, I wrote the none assistant,
thank you very much.
So Project Builder has created a basic
WebObjects application for me here.
And there's a couple of simple,
basically empty, do-nothing Java classes.
There's one called main,
you can see that it's really
not doing anything there.
There's one called application
that's printing to,
welcome to, I love you.
There's really nothing else going
on in here other than a blank,
an essentially blank,
a virtually blank main component called
main.wo that if I double-click on it,
I can work on it in WebObjects Builder.
So this is WebObjects Builder editing the
main page of my I love you application.
Okay?
I'm going to come back
to that in a second here.
We have this idea of resources.
These are additional things that you
want available to your application.
And a great resource to add
here would probably be my,
what did I call that object model?
Anybody remember?
Autobuy Steve, there it is.
Thank you.
You guys are great assistants, too.
So by adding that object
model to my application,
I've now got the ability to work with
these vehicle objects right in here.
So one thing you might want to say is
we're going to build a simple application
where you can type in something
about the car that you want to buy.
And it will find all the cars.
Let's say you type in the
maximum you can spend.
So remember we have a base
price property on cars.
I want to find all the cars with the base
prices less than whatever I type here.
And have it fetch some cars for me.
There's a lot of great drag and
drop awareness between these
different tools of who does what.
So I can get
WebObjectsBuilder going here.
And I can say, you know what?
I want to be able to manipulate
vehicle objects from this
EO model in WebObjectsBuilder.
I drag it there.
I drop it here.
And it adds a special object that
knows how to go and fetch cars for me.
A thing back here at the bottom
called a vehicle display group.
So here in WebObjects Builder,
it's starting to get a
little bit more interesting.
I've got some various things
now here that I can connect to.
I've got this vehicle display
group object that's got a whole
bunch of funny properties that
I can message and leverage here.
I don't have any UI yet.
A little UI might be nice.
Can I have a little
UI creating music please?
Oh, we don't have any music.
All right.
That's fine.
Welcome to AutoBySteve,
which I bet you is a domain name
that's already taken on the web.
So we'll make it bigger.
We'll show you the vast array of
complex formatting that's available
in WebObjects Builder here.
And the incredible powerful
tags you can put in,
like the horizontal rule tag.
You can, if you like,
you can make any one.
This is just static HTML,
but you can make these things
dynamic if you want as well.
If you want a horizontal rule
tag whose width corresponds
to the price of the car,
you can do that.
You can click on this thing and say,
"Make this a dynamic object," and
hook up its width property to the
price of the currently selected car.
I'm not going to do that.
What I would like to do though is to
have a simple form here where you're
going to type in some information.
How much money have you got?
and we'll have a text field where
you can type in your net worth
and then it will find all the
cars with a submit button that are
worth up to that amount of money.
Now this is just basic UI stuff here.
These things are what we
call dynamic elements.
They're objects that correspond
sort of to HTML input fields.
And if you click on this button here,
you can actually look at the raw HTML and
see what's actually gone on here.
It's just,
it's added a WebObject called form
that goes from there up to here.
By the way, for those of you who
haven't used WebObjects 4.5,
you can now triple click on the
beginning tag and it selects all
the way down to the closing tag.
Oh man, is this great.
You should upgrade to WebObjects
4.5 just for that feature,
let me tell you.
But that's basic HTML with some tags
in it that are going to be studied
during this request response loop.
And down here are some bindings
that I haven't filled in yet of
what do I want to have happen when
you click on that submit button.
So for instance,
This thing called the
Vehicle Display Group,
you can send all these messages to it.
I can send this message
"Qualify Data Source" to it.
And you draw a line like that.
I want that button to send
this message to this object on
the server when it's clicked.
I want this text field here to be used
to restrict the cars that I'm fetching.
I want the base price of the car to be
no more than whatever you typed in there.
So I've hooked up two objects now
to objects back at this middle tier,
and WebObjects is going to do some
screwy things with the URLs when
it sends this HTML to you,
so that when you click on that
button and fill in that field,
it can unwind all that stuff and
decide what message should be sent
to what object at the middle tier,
even if there's a thousand people
simultaneously using this application.
Now that would be a complete application.
Who says we should run this now?
Or is there something we should add?
Look at the cars maybe that it fetches?
Okay, alright, sure, sure.
Let's put in a table.
For each car,
I want to display the name and the price.
Something really simple.
A little table wizard here.
I want the second row wrapped
in what we call a repetition.
And if you can see,
the second row of that table there has
actually got a blue line around it.
That means this thing is
inside a woe repetition object,
which just means anything inside here
is going to repeat over and over again,
once for everything on a list.
Well,
we'd like to have the name of the car,
and this is just basic
HTML and its price.
And then down here, for every car,
we want to use a string
object to display its name,
and another string object
to display its price.
And now we need to arrange to loop
over this list of cars that my
display group has just fetched,
and come up with a many,
many rowed table.
So what I'm going to do,
when you work in a loop
in computer science,
you've often got some
kind of an "I" variable,
you know, the for loop or the while loop
that goes around the loop.
I'm going to create a little
variable here called "vehicle."
I'm going to add to my class
A vehicle object on this particular
page that's going to be used
to iterate through some other
collection of vehicle objects.
And the collection I'd like to iterate
through is the list of all the objects
that the display group just fetched.
So I'm going to draw a line
to that repetition and say,
"Use this list." All the
displayed objects.
"Use this item." Use this
variable to go through the list.
And then this item is a vehicle,
so display its vehicle name here.
Display its base price here.
Okay, now that would be a
completed application.
I'm tempted to actually try running this,
but you know,
it's much more fun to actually talk
about these things without running them.
Let me put in one more thing.
We'll put in how many
vehicles you matched.
We'll put in a string which
is the count of the number
of vehicles that you matched.
that many vehicles.
Save.
Now I'm going to go back to
Project Builder and I was originally
going to try to futz around and display
it off of IE on this other machine
rather than OmniWeb on Project Builder
but I think it would be simpler.
Everybody will be able to see better if
we have the same stuff on both screens.
I think it wouldn't be fair to people
to have all the good stuff over here and
all the lame web browsing over there.
Would that be fair?
What do you think over here?
Yeah?
Alright.
So in this case I'm going
to actually use OmniWeb,
the browser that comes
with whatever this is here.
Yeah, it's my favorite browser too.
So I'm going to compile my
big I love you project here.
and that just compiled these various
Java classes and this one you'll notice,
the main.java,
it added a couple of objects to it.
We've now got an object called
a vehicle display group,
we've got another object called vehicle.
Those were added by the
process of manipulating
things in WebObjects Builder.
So let's try actually running this here.
Please, please, please.
So you can launch an application
here in Project Builder,
and it will ask your web
browser to rendezvous on
the URL of this application.
Let me see if I can get exactly the
right combination of overlapping
windows on the screen here.
U, but not U, and yes.
So here is a debugging window where
all the SQL that's being generated is
automatically going to appear here,
along with a vast array of helpful
debugging messages at the start
telling you the state of all
various things in the application.
But here's my browser.
How much money have you got?
I've got $20,000.
And there are no vehicles for $20,000.
Well, I click on Submit there.
Over here you can see
it connecting to Oracle.
You can see the SQL here that
it automatically generated.
Can you see that on the right-hand side?
I didn't type any of that.
That was implied by these objects and
their relationships to each other and
the information in the model about
how they're represented in Oracle.
And I can tell over here
that there were 95 rows.
95 rows of SQL came back.
95 blank vehicle objects
were automatically created.
They were each stuffed with
these various properties from
the columns of the database.
Set your name to this and
your minimum price to this and
your maximum price to this.
And then that repetition
on the front-end side,
the main component, was not aware of how
any of this happened,
so it just looped over somewhere.
It looped over some list
of cars that you gave it,
some list of objects.
And it displayed them all for me here.
So we've got all these various
different 95 rows in the table.
I have no idea who actually
makes any of these cars.
So it might be useful to add that
to the displayed information here.
In every row of my table,
I'll put that palette away for a moment.
In every row of my table I'm displaying
the vehicle name in one table cell here.
But why not put in another string?
and a blank space and ask the
vehicle for its maker object.
You're going through this object
browser down at the bottom.
You're traversing the relationships
defined in your EO model.
And I want the maker name
to appear on that string.
Drag, drop.
This will now, when I refetch here,
it will now do a whole bunch more
fetching because it's going to go
and get all the manufacturer objects
that it did not need until now.
There's a whole lazy scheme
in here called faulting where
even though an object has a
relationship to a manufacturer,
we're not actually going to fetch
that manufacturer object until
you indicate you actually need it,
until you ask for one of its properties.
So I set up a, in WebObjects builder,
I set up another string that said
ask the vehicle for its maker
and ask him for its maker name.
Let's go out to my inspector here.
There's an inspector paradigm
in WebObjects Builder.
You can see that I'm
deep inside a table here.
I'm inside a string, inside a table data,
which is inside a repetition,
inside a table.
There's this new path thing in 4.5
at the bottom that makes it much
easier to select and to tell exactly
where you are and manipulate things.
Selecting a string,
like suppose you selected a bold string.
Did you mean to select the bold
tags at the beginning and the end,
or just the string?
There's some great new stuff in this
new 4.5 WebObjects Builder to help
you deal with that complex stuff.
I want to pick this table,
and in my inspector window up here,
I'm going to pick a table that's
I want to add on the
right-hand side another column.
Let's call it picture.
Where could he be going with this?
And on this cell right here,
let's put in instead of a string,
let's put in an image object.
This is another basic
object in web objects.
Just like the string knows how to
send a message and take the result and
interpolate it right into the page,
this one knows how to send a message to
someone to get some JPEG or GIF data.
GIF?
How do you say it down here?
Actually, I asked some of my
Apple Canada colleagues
how to pronounce it,
and they say Java.
So that's the...
Anyway, I'm going to say,
these cars happen to have a
property called Image JPEG Data,
which if I'd been
planning a little better,
I would have renamed that
in EOModeler to be Picture.
But let's drag that to this thing
and say that's where your picture
data is going to come from.
I happen to know that they're, whoops,
they're not pings, they're JPEG images.
And now let's fetch not quite so
many cars just to keep it useful.
Let's fetch all the cars for $11,000.
Now we got pictures.
Oh, thank you, thank you, yeah.
Okay, I did not, thank.
Thank you, but I did not actually take
the pictures of the cars.
Thank you.
All right.
Is there anyone from Microsoft here?
I stole this from one of your websites.
Excuse me.
I'm sorry.
So there's a bunch of
cars and some trucks too,
and this isn't maybe as useful
as it could be because we're
getting everything mixed up here.
We're getting cars and pickup trucks
and minivans all mixed together.
We might want to do a more
complex qualification in some way.
Perhaps instead of just letting
you choose the base price
that you want to spend it,
we could hook up a range
in there if you wanted.
You could say price more
than this and less than this.
You could do all that
very elaborate stuff.
In fact, you can graphically define
some sophisticated fetches
right inside EO Modeler itself.
Alas, no time.
I'm looking at this great counter here.
I've got 6 minutes and 19 seconds.
Okay, go, go, go.
All right, all right.
I want to have a pop-up list,
which is this one,
that shows all the different
categories of cars.
You might remember there was a
category object in the database
that was just a list of things like
pickup truck and minivan and so on.
I might like to display all of
those on a pop-up list here so I can
restrict my fetch a little bit better.
Well, to do that, I might go back to my
object model and say,
let me bring in a category object.
Drag, drop.
Add that.
This one, I want it to fetch all the
objects when this page is loaded.
Fetch all the category objects.
Don't wait for me.
Fetch them all.
And I'd like to go through all
the category objects and display
them on that pop-up list here.
So we have another paradigm of
lists and items that go through
a list being applied to a pop-up.
Same kind of design pattern
happens on pop-ups and browsers and
repetitions all throughout WebObjects.
I want to loop through it with this,
we've got this convenient
thing called Selected Object.
Yeah, okay, that's going to work.
Oh, not there!
Oh, wait!
Undo!
Thank--oh, phew!
Another good feature
in WebObjects Builder.
I want to work through that thing
and display all the category names.
So now I've got a pop-up,
just with that little wiring there,
that's going to fetch all the
objects from the database and
display their names on a pop-up list.
One of them is going to be selected.
And you can arrange that the vehicle
display group matches exactly the
category that you selected there.
I want the selected category to be
used to qualify and restrict the
kinds of cars that I'm going to get.
These might seem kind of odd now,
but this sort of paradigm comes
up quite a bit in WebObjects.
Now, at this point,
I do need to stop and recompile,
because it did add one whole line of
code to my application at this point,
which if -- oh, there it is.
Yeah, I know, it's all right,
don't worry about it.
It did add one line here,
category display group,
and there was a helpful, thank you,
actually, that was very helpful.
There is,
someone did point out to me that
I have a validation error on this page,
and you can have WebObjects Builder
offer bits of information to you.
Item may not be a constant when
display stringer value is bound.
I don't think that's true,
so I'm going to ignore that.
It doesn't expect me that
I'm cheating a little bit.
Well, I'm not cheating,
but I'm using an object that you're
not supposed to be writing to,
so don't you do that.
Although, it's actually worked so far,
so I don't know what to... It's
one less thing I have to type,
and that always helps me in a demo.
The less I type, the better.
All right, we're almost done here.
And now, when we run this thing,
you can see that it actually fetched
a bunch of categories for me already.
It's gone through the category list.
We go back over to OmniWeb here.
Now we've got this handy pop-up of
all the different kinds of cars.
Show me only the, I don't know,
the pickup trucks for 20 grand.
Here they come, all the pickup trucks.
Oh, no, I changed my mind.
I wanted the minivan.
So it's actually forming some more
complex queries here on the fly,
and yet I still haven't actually
written any SQL or any HTML.
Now, it wouldn't be a developer
conference if I didn't try to write
a line or two of Java code in here.
So I want to show you one last
powerful thing here in the
Enterprise Objects Modeler,
and that's the idea of
extending these objects,
these vehicle objects,
so that it can implement additional
business rules on your own.
Right now the vehicle object is happy to
fetch things for you and display them,
and you can send it messages
asking for its properties.
You could write an editing application,
none of this is read-only.
You could write another application
where you change prices of cars,
and you're sending a
message to an object saying,
"Set your price to this,"
and it tells the database,
and we could go through that
whole complex slide again.
But I might like to trigger some
business logic in these objects as well.
I might want to have EO Modeler
create a little vehicle.java object
for me and add it to my project.
So that's the idea.
Thank you.
So here's a vehicle.java.
This is a basic data container.
It's got messages that set
the price and get the price,
and set the name and get the name,
and set this and get that.
And they're all in terms of this
take stored value for key method,
which means they're really consulting
a dictionary in the superclass,
which is a generic record,
and that's maybe more
information than anyone really
wants to hear at this point.
But the interesting thing is that I can
add my own additional methods here.
I recently bought a car.
How many people recently purchased a car?
Did you enjoy that experience?
Is the internet not the greatest
gift to the car buying process
you could possibly imagine?
I mean, thank you, that's the best.
But I could not get a straight
answer from the guy as to whether
leasing or buying was a good idea.
How many people lease their car?
How many people have purchased their car?
Good, I'm with you.
I didn't get leasing at all.
I don't understand.
Way too hard.
It was partly because
I couldn't ask the guy,
"Well, what does it cost to lease?" Well,
It depends.
How long are you going to keep the car?
What's your trade in?
What's the future value of this car?
How much money do we think you make?
Does the manager like you?
All of these complex rules go
into coming up with the number,
which is the lease price of the car.
And in this sort of
enterprise objects world,
we can implement algorithms like that
as extensions to these objects that
you might have here in EOModeler.
So for instance,
I might want to add a little
bit of Java code here.
[Transcript missing]
I'm better now, thank you.
Don't translate that part.
That was a mistake.
I swear, we can fix this in the editing,
right?
We can fix this in the editing.
I want to write a method
here called Monthly Lease
Cost that returns an integer,
and I'm going to extend this vehicle
object with something that computes
the leasing price of the car.
Well,
we're going to return the base price
of the car as if it was an integer.
Divided by 43.
I bet it's more complicated than that,
but as far as I know, it isn't.
So because I've actually
extended this Java class here,
now I do have to stop and recompile.
It's got relationship
to these other objects,
I forgot to create them.
We'll compile everybody now.
Went pretty well up until that point.
So we're compiling all these things.
We've added custom business logic
to my car application right now.
In fact,
if I go back to WebObjects Builder here,
in this cell,
we might add a nice helpful string,
"Lease me for only some amount
of money per month." Well,
let's ask the vehicle for
its monthly lease cost.
You see how that new method
I wrote has just shown up in
the object browser down here?
All these tools are aware of
what the other ones are doing.
So we're going to connect that
lease cost to this string here.
And because my mother might be watching,
we'll be neat and we'll put
dollar signs and commas on it.
We've got nice formatter objects
that can be applied to these strings.
And let's try running this.
Again, come back to OmniWeb.
How much money have you got?
Well, show me all the trucks.
Make it snappy.
Here come a bunch of vehicles.
Lease this one for $279 a month.
Lease the next one for $336 a month.
So my custom rule is being triggered
every time it comes to one of
these tags in the repetition,
and WebObjects is sorting out the
context and figuring what object you were
talking about and locating the method and
loading it and sending it to this string,
and this string is
sending everything back.
Okay, things have gone pretty well here.
I've got time to do something
that probably won't work.
I'm getting the big hook here,
but this is my last -- okay,
I saw the sign.
Okay, you can put this skull and
crossbones sign down now.
Let me do one last thing.
You know what I hate?
Yeah, yeah,
everything about buying a car.
I hate this kind of application.
Show me all the cars for $9,000.
One, vehicles.
Oh, man, you know,
people build these complex applications,
then they can't be bothered.
They get the pluralizing logic right.
Or they try to be helpful and
they put parentheses around the S,
which shows I was kind
of thinking about this.
Man, I hate that!
Well,
I wanted to solve this once and for all,
so I've got my own little
framework of objects here,
which I'm going to add to
local library frameworks.
I've got a little Web Doodads
toolkit here that I want
to add to this application.
And I'm going to go
into WebObjects Builder,
and these, remember these palettes?
There's the string that's saying
"three" and here's the word "vehicles"
or "one vehicles." I got this
object here called a pluralizer.
I spent a lot of time writing
this two-line component.
I'm going to take that
word and delete it.
I'm going to bring in my pluralizer here
and I'm going to hook it up to a number.
It needs to know a number.
How many vehicles are we displaying?
Well,
this is the same number as we just saw.
Count, right?
You bind it to count.
It needs to know a word.
What word do you want to use here?
Vehicle.
and it's even got some logic in
there to put S on certain words,
to put IES on other certain words,
and so on.
And let's see, is there any hope that
that's going to work?
I had a lot of trouble with
this framework earlier today.
We'll know in a second.
It didn't work.
We got this far.
We got to cheat.
We got to go here to WebDoodads.
The code in the framework isn't working.
We're going to find the
WebDoodads framework here.
Oh my goodness.
We're going to find that
class which is here.
It's a Pluralizer class.
Oh my God, it's WebScript and that's not
supported in the next release.
Fortunately,
this demo is on the current release.
Put that in there and put
the Pluralizer component.
This is all supposed to work.
See how easy this is?
This is supposed to work on the dragging
and dropping from the ... Oh yeah,
it doesn't go in the classes suitcase.
It goes in the
You try doing a demo
for all these people.
You try moving all your stuff from one
machine to another at the last minute.
You'll see a number of little things
that just don't quite... Enough talking,
smart guy.
Let's just see it.
Please, baby, baby, please.
Ah, zero vehicles.
Oh, it needs a space.
It needs a space between them.
What a great object.
Aren't you glad you came all the way here
to WWDC to see something great like this?
Okay, see this?
Zero vehicles, $9,000.
One vehicle.
Thank you, thank you.
$12,000.
Topics include what's new in version 4.5,
a roadmap of features,
building a high-level application,
and an introduction to EOF.
There are other UI's you can do as well.
That was an HTML UI that
I was building there.
You saw a Java client this
morning in Steve's keynote.
I was going to try to demo it,
but because I'm over time
and because you've already
seen it probably twice today,
we'll skip that.
That's a scheme by which the client and
the server can exchange an XML write-up
of what the UI should look like.
It means you don't have to think about
the interface at all in a lot of cases.
Or you can design your own fancier
UI using Interface Builder and
laying out swing widgets to
build a much more complex thing.
You really ought to go to
that direct-to-Java client
to hear more about that.
We also have a partner
called Report Mill,
another thing I'm not going to show you,
which can generate high-quality
PDF documents on the fly.
You build a PDF template and you do this
kind of dragging and dropping stuff.
It makes a very rich thing that might
look exactly like the invoice you
might be sending them in the mail,
only it's PDF and they can print it.
Printing HTML is hard.
HTML is not really a language
designed for printing,
but PDF is.
This Report Mill product
is a great example of that.
This is a swell way for delivering
somebody a rich and professional-looking
printable user interface.
Go to reportmill.com.
They've got live WebObjects demos of
their product running right there.
XML.
Who cares about XML?
Anybody?
Have you read about it?
Have you heard of the XML?
Yeah?
So we've got UML, we've got XML,
we've got WML.
Is there VML?
There's VRML.
XML is becoming popular as
a way of exchanging data.
With a couple of lines of code,
you can create what we
call a WOXML coder object.
You can ask it,
"Take this vehicle and turn it
into an XML string for me." It will
come back with an XML string,
or it will encode a whole graph of
objects as XML that you can then
deliver to somebody in some special way.
There are objects that can
parse XML coming in as well.
WAP.
We've got a partner that does a
wireless application framework,
a little palette of objects that
know how to emit WAP bits and pieces,
or WML, I guess it is,
Wireless Markup Language,
so you can design a
little UI to run on your,
if this was a phone, on your phone.
And of course, you can mix and match all
these different pieces as well.
You can have an application that's aware
of what different people are doing,
and it sends WAP to this guy,
and HTML to somebody else,
and PDF to somebody else.
In addition,
we've got these super-duper assistants.
We've got Direct2Web,
which I would like to say that I don't
think Direct2Web is a toy at all.
I think it's worthy of some serious
study in that it's a terrific way to
knock out a WebObjects application
based on an EO model very rapidly.
It builds a very elaborate rules-driven
engine that you don't have to
think about if you don't want to,
but I bet you I could build a much
better-looking application with
Direct2Web within some certain
user interface constraints.
I could build a great-looking application
in about 10 minutes that would take
me a week of equivalent messing
around with WebObjects builders.
So check that one out
too at the session 4.05.
Direct2JavaClient,
which we've seen a couple of times today,
for the same kind of idea:
a rules-engine-based way of having
the UI constructed on the fly and
offering you an assistant where you can
modify the UI that it's going to use.
Let's not look at them.
Let's all go to that other
session and check those out.
In the meantime, we've got this tool,
Monitor, and its little sidekick buddy,
WOTaskD,
that actually launches all of your
applications in the complex environment.
Keeps them running.
Launches them again if they crash.
Sends you mail.
Gathers statistics and so on.
And it has a UI like this where
you can indicate -- this is an
actual WebObjects application,
but here I'm showing I've got five
copies of some application and two
of them don't seem to be running,
but I could click on those knife
switches to start them up and down.
And it gathers statistics and
monitors deaths and so on.
So it's a nice tool for
managing a complex deployment.
We've got a bunch of sessions coming
up on big application development
and all these various issues.
How many people here are going to
most of the other WebObjects sessions?
I'm just curious.
Oh, that's fantastic.
It's so great to see so many
people here for all this stuff.
We love it and we hope you love it too.
And we love you.
And I hope -- no.
Lots of ways to learn more.
There's the WO Info Center application.
After you install your
free copy of WebObjects,
the first thing you ought to
run is this WO Info Center,
which gives you an application
where you can search all the
documentation for keywords.
You can run the live examples.
You can study things online.
You can go through a whole hierarchy of
books that are included and read them
online and look at all the examples.
The best place to get started.
And also, the quickest way to verify that
your WebObjects installation is
working properly is to run WO Info
Center and see if this comes up.
Shouldn't that be C-E-N-T-R-E?
The best way to get up to speed
with WebObjects is to take
our week-long training class.
This is the best way, coming to WWDC.
To take the intensive class and
go through the process of building
an elaborate application with a
qualified instructor is fantastic.
The second class is really
an in-depth discussion of the
Enterprise Objects Framework,
that whole database layer.
And we've recently added the third
class on WebObjects deployment,
where you get to manage
your own little empire.
Everybody gets an NTE machine and a
Solaris machine and a Mac OS X machine,
and you get to build these
complex things with the database
here and the web server there,
and you get to make them break
and try to put them back together.
It's really valuable for people who
are going to be doing deployment.
If you're planning a WebObjects app,
you ought to send someone
to that deployment class.
And I think that's about all.
I could talk,
I could refer you to all the references.
I'm going to go through the
remaining WebObjects sessions,
as they are all pretty good
follow-ups to this one.
But you've all got the schedule.
You can all see where they are.
These ones that are on Tuesday, I think,
are excellent and highly recommend it.
So if there are any questions -- oh,
we're almost out of time.
Oh, I have to take questions.
There's five more minutes.
I'd be happy to take a few questions
and perhaps not answer them properly.
Oh, Ernie.
Hello, Ernie.
I'm here to help you not answer things.
It's Ernie.